# Code Book

This code book describes the data, the variables, and transformations performed to clean up the data.

## Data

The tidy data is contained in the file `tidyData.txt`. It is a text file containing space-separated values. This data set is generated by running the script `run_analysis.R` which performs the following transformations to the original data set:

- After downloading the original data set, the data (training, test, features and activity_labels) is loaded. 
- Merge the training and test data sets to create one data set.
- Rename the columns using the features taken from `features.txt`.
- Extract only the columns with mean and standard deviation for each measurement. 
- Use descriptive activity names for the activities in the data set. We take the activity names from `activity_labels.txt`.
- Appropriately labels the data set with descriptive variable names.
- Create a new tidy set with the average of each variable for each activity and each subject. 
- Write the tidy data set to the `tidyData.txt` file.

The data set consists of 180 (30 subjects * 6 activities) observations. 

## Variables

There are 81 variables in total, which are divided into identifiers (2) and measurements (79).

### Identifiers

- `subjectId`

	It is the Subject identifier, which is an integer and ranges from 1 to 30.

- `activity`

    It identifies the activity identifier. It has six possible values which are self explanatory: 
	- `WALKING`
	- `WALKING_UPSTAIRS`
	- `WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS`
	- `SITTING`
	- `STANDING`
	- `LAYING`

### Measurements

- The measurements come from the accelerometer and gyroscope 3-axial raw signals tAcc-XYZ and tGyro-XYZ. 
- These time domain signals (prefix 't' to denote time) were captured at a constant rate of 50 Hz. 
- Then they were filtered using a median filter and a 3rd order low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 20 Hz to remove noise. 
- Similarly, the acceleration signal was then separated into body and gravity acceleration signals (tBodyAcc-XYZ and tGravityAcc-XYZ) using another low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 0.3 Hz. 
- Subsequently, the body linear acceleration and angular velocity were derived in time to obtain Jerk signals (tBodyAccJerk-XYZ and tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ). 
- Also the magnitude of these three-dimensional signals were calculated using the Euclidean norm (tBodyAccMag, tGravityAccMag, tBodyAccJerkMag, tBodyGyroMag, tBodyGyroJerkMag). 
- Finally a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) was applied to some of these signals producing fBodyAcc-XYZ, fBodyAccJerk-XYZ, fBodyGyro-XYZ, fBodyAccJerkMag, fBodyGyroMag, fBodyGyroJerkMag. (Note the 'f' to indicate frequency domain signals). 
- All measurments are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].
- The units used for the accelerations are 'g's (gravity of earth -> 9.8 m/sec2).
- The gyroscope units are rad/sec.
- 'X', 'Y', and 'Z' is used to denote 3-axial signals in the X, Y and Z directions.

Below is a list of these measurements:

- `tBodyAccMeanX`
- `tBodyAccMeanY`
- `tBodyAccMeanZ`
- `tBodyAccStdX`
- `tBodyAccStdY`
- `tBodyAccStdZ`
- `tGravityAccMeanX`
- `tGravityAccMeanY`
- `tGravityAccMeanZ`
- `tGravityAccStdX`
- `tGravityAccStdY`
- `tGravityAccStdZ`
- `tBodyAccJerkMeanX`
- `tBodyAccJerkMeanY`
- `tBodyAccJerkMeanZ`
- `tBodyAccJerkStdX`
- `tBodyAccJerkStdY`
- `tBodyAccJerkStdZ`
- `tBodyGyroMeanX`
- `tBodyGyroMeanY`
- `tBodyGyroMeanZ`
- `tBodyGyroStdX`
- `tBodyGyroStdY`
- `tBodyGyroStdZ`
- `tBodyGyroJerkMeanX`
- `tBodyGyroJerkMeanY`
- `tBodyGyroJerkMeanZ`
- `tBodyGyroJerkStdX`
- `tBodyGyroJerkStdY`
- `tBodyGyroJerkStdZ`
- `tBodyAccMagMean`
- `tBodyAccMagStd`
- `tGravityAccMagMean`
- `tGravityAccMagStd`
- `tBodyAccJerkMagMean`
- `tBodyAccJerkMagStd`
- `tBodyGyroMagMean`
- `tBodyGyroMagStd`
- `tBodyGyroJerkMagMean`
- `tBodyGyroJerkMagStd`
- `fBodyAccMeanX`
- `fBodyAccMeanY`
- `fBodyAccMeanZ`
- `fBodyAccStdX`
- `fBodyAccStdY`
- `fBodyAccStdZ`
- `fBodyAccMeanFreqX`
- `fBodyAccMeanFreqY`
- `fBodyAccMeanFreqZ`
- `fBodyAccJerkMeanX`
- `fBodyAccJerkMeanY`
- `fBodyAccJerkMeanZ`
- `fBodyAccJerkStdX`
- `fBodyAccJerkStdY`
- `fBodyAccJerkStdZ`
- `fBodyAccJerkMeanFreqX`
- `fBodyAccJerkMeanFreqY`
- `fBodyAccJerkMeanFreqZ`
- `fBodyGyroMeanX`
- `fBodyGyroMeanY`
- `fBodyGyroMeanZ`
- `fBodyGyroStdX`
- `fBodyGyroStdY`
- `fBodyGyroStdZ`
- `fBodyGyroMeanFreqX`
- `fBodyGyroMeanFreqY`
- `fBodyGyroMeanFreqZ`
- `fBodyAccMagMean`
- `fBodyAccMagStd`
- `fBodyAccMagMeanFreq`
- `fBodyAccJerkMagMean`
- `fBodyAccJerkMagStd`
- `fBodyAccJerkMagMeanFreq`
- `fBodyGyroMagMean`
- `fBodyGyroMagStd`
- `fBodyGyroMagMeanFreq`
- `fBodyGyroJerkMagMean`
- `fBodyGyroJerkMagStd`
- `fBodyGyroJerkMagMeanFreq`