# Course Project: Getting and Cleaning Data

This repository contains the R code and documentation for the project for the course ["Getting and Cleaning Data"](https://www.coursera.org/learn/data-cleaning), which is part of Data Science Specialization.

The purpose of this project is to demonstrate the ability to collect, work with, and clean a data set. The goal is to prepare tidy data that can be used for later analysis. 

## Information about the Data Set

The data set used in this project is obtained from the [Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones Data Set](http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones). 

The experiments were carried out with a group of 30 volunteers, each performing six activities (WALKING, WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING). The data was collected from the accelerometer and gyroscope of the Samsung Galaxy S II smartphone attached to the waists of the participants. The experiments were video-recorded to label the data manually. The obtained dataset was randomly partitioned into two sets, where 70% of the volunteers was selected for generating the training data and 30% the test data. 

## Contents of the repository

This repository contains the following files:

- `README.md`: It provides a general overview of the project, the original data set and how the tidy data set is created.  
- `run_analysis.R`: It is the R script that is used to create the tidy data set. 
- `CodeBook.md`: It describes the data, the variables, and transformations performed to clean up the data.
- `tidyData.txt`: It contains the tidy data set generated by running the script `run_analysis.R`.

## Information about the R script (`run_analysis.R`)

The R script, `run_analysis.R`, is used to create a tidy data set. It performs that following tasks:

- Download and unzip the data set if it does not already exist
- Load all the data (training, test, features and activity_labels)
- Merge the training and test data sets to create one data set
- Extracts only the mean and standard deviation for each measurement
- Use descriptive activity names for the activities in the data set
- Appropriately labels the data set with descriptive variable names
- Create a second, independent tidy set with the average of each variable for each activity and each subject
- Write the tidy data set to the `tidyData.txt` file
